I think what we'll do now if if it's
okay with you is um turn to string
theory and I mean I'm I'm so ignorant
about string theory that it's kind of
miracle and I guess so I can I'm going
to start by asking you some basic
questions I guess the first question you
know you touch upon this in in the the
second edition of your 1999 book which
is um the elegant Universe super strings
hidden dimensions in the Quest for
ultimate Theory you've just updated that
and uh you open the book uh by
explaining I suppose the at least part
of the problem that string theories
hypothetically poised to solve and at
least to some degree that's the uh lack
of unity between the theories of general
relativity and the theories of the of
the Quantum of the quantum physicists
and so maybe you could explain to us
first what it means that those theories
aren't Unified like what that means yeah
what that means in the scientific realm
but also what it means practically and
then walk us through how String Theory
what string theory is and how it
constitutes a potential solution to that
uh to that
conundrum yeah so the two big
discoveries of the 20th century are
Einstein's general theory of relativity
which describes the force of gravity and
as we discussed before the force of
gravity matters when things are big
stars and galaxies in the whole universe
and in that domain Einstein's ideas have
been tested and they do an incredible
job of explaining things that we see in
the heavens the other big development
which we've spent some time already
talking about is quantum physics which
describes the Small Things molecules
atoms subatomic particles and in that
domain quantum physics has itself been
tested to incredible precision and it
works the crazy thing is in any
situation where you need to put quantum
physics and general relativity together
when you need to use the equations in
tandem you get
nonsensical results you get results like
Infinity is the only answer that you
ever get for any question that you pose
now you might say well do you ever need
to put them together quantum mechanics
is small general relativity is Big those
seem pretty separate but there are
extreme Realms like the center of a
black hole where a lot of mass has been
crushed to a very small size big Mass
general relativity small size quantum
physics or the Big Bang the entire
observable universe crushed to a very
small size a lot of mass energy small
size again you need general relativity
and quantum mechanics and so in those
extreme Realms you find that the
equations simply fall apart the laws of
general relativity laws of quantum fig
they do not play to well together they
are ferocious antagonists and that's the
problem that we've been trying to fix
produces these mathematical absurdities
that you've been describing and
interferes with our understanding I
guess there's the aesthetic problem too
which is that we're possessed by the
strong intimation that all forms of
descriptive knowledge should unify at
least not exist in contradiction to one
another that seems well it seems to
violate I don't know our understanding
of what understanding itself is and so
that's okay okay and so well so can you
give us a maybe a more
tangible indication of what s sort of
absurdities Might emerge in the
conceptual realm when you're dealing
with something like the the situation
that obtains in a black hole and you
said that the the equations will produce
references to Infinity continually which
seem to be non-helpful but that's still
pretty abstract for people who aren't
mathematically oriented is there a way
of simplifying that so that it's more
graspable yeah so for imag imagine you
jump into a black
inadvisable but imagine you do it we
know that as you get closer and closer
to the center of the black hole things
will start to feel uncomfortable if you
jumped in feet first your feet are going
to be pulled more strongly than your
head so your body is going to stretch
it's going to spaghettify we call it
ultimately it's going to be pulled apart
into its constituents and those
constituents are then going to fall
toward the center and the Deep question
is what finally happens when you
actually reach the center and if you ask
any physicist today for the answer they
would be forced to tell you if they're
honest we don't know we just don't know
what happens at the center of the black
hole some ideas are it's a portal to
another universe that's a wild sci-fi
sounding idea it be wonderful it's the
case but we just don't know some people
think it's a location where time comes
to an end it's just where there's no
notion of time any further so these are
the things that we just don't know how
to answer so I have I have a question
about that too
well my correct me if I'm wrong about
this but my understanding is that as
something falls into a black hole and
this is from the perspective of an
external Observer as it falls it it it's
transforming more and more slowly and
that that
transformation decreases in in speed
until it's really at a standstill and so
so that
and so I'm I'm wondering if that's the
case and
that there's that time de delay that's
accompanied by descent into a black
hole I'm I'm I'm trying to put like
vague imaginations here imaginings
together you have something that's very
very dense at the center of that and you
also have this time delation process is
it and and you have the idea that at
some distant point in the future
everything's going to come back together
in a big crunch at least that's one of
the hypothesis like is there any
difference
between the destination point when a
given body is falling into a given black
hole and the Big Crunch itself like is
that destination point the same
destination point I mean that would
account to some degree for the kind of
infinite density at at the center of the
black hole and it seems to make sense if
if time is dilating to that
degree that's the best I can it's a good
question and certainly you're right from
the standpoint of an outside Observer
watching say you jump into a black hole
they will see you move slower and slower
as you reach the Event Horizon the edge
of the black hole and in fact they will
see you ultimately come to a standstill
right at the Event Horizon itself but
the amazing thing is from your
perspective you will fall right through
that event horizon you will go right to
the center and it will happen if finite
time it will not happen in some long
cosmological time it'll happen in finite
time and so it's not as though the
center of the blackle is the Big Crunch
if there is such a thing for the
universe but it is the case that we
believe that if we could answer the
question of what happens at the center
of a black hole we would then be able to
answer the question of what happens at
the Big Crunch or what happens at the
Big Bang because we Face exactly the
same issue if you weren't so interested
in black holes but you're interested in
How the Universe Got started again ask
any physicist what really happened at
the moment of the Big Bang Time Zero
itself if the physicist is
straightforward honest they'll say we
don't know for exactly the same reason
that's a realm where the density is so
high that you need general relativity
where quantum physics is vital because
it's so small and the equations break
down and the equations are the only tool
that we have to gain insight into Realms
that we can't literally visit and that's
the issue that we're trying to fix Okay
so why does it matter that with from
your perspective you would continue
falling at a finite time with regard to
the question of whether what's at the
bottom of the black hole is the eventual
aggregation of all matter I I I
because looking at it from the outside
as that falling entity grinds to a halt
there's an infinite duration of time
that's now involved in the process and
in that infinite duration of time if the
Big Crunch models are correct that big
crunch is eventually going to occur so I
don't understand why they don't yeah why
why they don't necessarily dovetail
let's say or converge so our our yeah so
our goal is to be able to explain the
happenings in the universe from any and
all perspectives the one St Einstein
taught us is that different perspectives
can tell very different stories about
the universe but our goal is to be able
ble to understand all those stories we
want to chronolog we want to Chronicle
all the narratives if you will that
could be told about the universe and so
you're right from the standpoint of the
outside Observer the chronicle you're
telling is correct infinite time but we
also want to know the chronicle from the
person that could fall in as well
[Music]